How do we formulate our moral values?
Do we just copy those around us?
Do we judge our actions to be okay
if we see other people doing them?
Do we continue to behave exactly
how we were trained to behave as children?
Do we allow our values to be decided for us
by an external authority?
parents, peer groups, professors
politicians, priests, prophets?
Do we question the values we encounter
and construct our own values
based on critical assessments?
Many members of religious ideologies
give credit to their religion
for their moral values.
But some go further and take credit
on behalf of their religion
for the moral values of non-members.
It’s been claimed time and time again
— and it’s still being claimed —
that people who live their lives
without any belief in gods,
religion or the supernatural
have nonetheless had their morals shaped
by the dominant religions
of their geographical region.
It’s a predictable claim.
Many religious individuals regard their religion
as the fundamental or even exclusive source
of human morality.
For them, if non-believers appear
to lead decent, moral lives
it must be down to the pervasive influence
of their religion.
In the West, it’s claimed that secular morals
have been shaped
by something referred to
as ‘the Judeo-Christian tradition’
— a hybrid of Judaism and Christianity.
So, should we allow the credit
for our core moral values
to be appropriated in this way?
When people claim that secular values
borrow from the Judeo-Christian tradition
what’s striking is their decision
to ignore all history
before the emergence of Judaism and Christianity.
Modern human beings had been in existence
for over 100,000 years by the time Judaism
— a much older religion than Christianity —
was in its infancy.
Are we expected to accept
that until the advent of Judaism
human beings had developed no sense
of how to treat each other
to co-exist as social creatures?
Did the values of these religions
somehow spring
ready-made from a moral vacuum with no reference
to the values of the local cultures of the time?
Of course they didn’t.
Both religions borrowed from pre-existing
social conventions and principles.
It’s understandable that those who argue
for the primacy of Judeo-Christian values
would want to stop the historical search
for moral values at their own religion
but there’s no valid justification for doing so.
Certain principles of moral conduct
tend to emerge naturally in social groups
purely because they help to preserve the group
— for example, the basic principle ‘don’t kill’.
A culture that adopts the principle:
‘kill as many people as you can indiscriminately’
isn’t going to survive long.
When a religion comes along and lays down laws
reflecting social conventions and principles
already in existence across humanity
like not stealing and not murdering
that religion doesn’t suddenly own
the intellectual rights to those principles.
Religion is not the innovator here,
just an imitator.
Animal studies show that non-human social species
demonstrate empathy, compassion
and an awareness of fairness
which are significant ingredients in morality.
Primatologist Frans de Waal and his colleagues
found that when given the choice to swap
different kinds of token
for different food rewards
chimpanzees and capuchins frequently swapped
‘prosocial’ tokens
which rewarded both themselves and a partner
of their species
rather than ‘selfish’ tokens which rewarded
them alone.
Capuchins have been observed to reward partners
for cooperation in a task to gain food
even when they have the choice to keep all
of it for themselves.
They’ve also been observed to protest aggressively
when they see a fellow capuchin receiving
a better reward
for performing the same task.
After fights, chimpanzees display distinctive
reconciliation behaviour
stretching out a hand to an enemy,
kissing, embracing and grooming.
Basic equitable behaviour demonstrating
a keen sense of fairness
has been observed in a range of social species.
To suggest religion is the source
of this equitable behaviour is plainly absurd.
And it’s no less absurd to suggest
it’s the source of human equitable behaviour.
What exactly is ‘the Judeo-Christian tradition’
supposed to mean?
Judaism and Christianity show
significant overlap in their construction
holding many of the same
ancient texts as sacred.
The Jewish Tanakh contains 24 books
that appear in the Christian ‘Old Testament’.
But even though these two branches of religion
share many ancient texts
there are significant differences
in their translations
interpretations, perspectives
and foundational values.
Many Jews and Christians strongly object
to being lumped together.
Writing in the 1970s,
Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits commented:
‘As to dialogue in the purely theological sense’
‘nothing could be more fruitless or pointless.’
‘Judaism is Judaism because it rejects Christianity’
‘and Christianity is Christianity because
it rejects Judaism.’
‘What is usually referred to
as the Judeo-Christian tradition‘
’exists only in Christian or secularist fantasy.’
The Tanakh contains instructions that are
explicitly rejected
by the figure of Jesus, the Christian messiah
and Christianity is repeatedly presented
as a reformation of older Jewish ideas.
For example, in the Jewish Torah
the book of Vayikra chapter 24,
verses 19-20 states:
‘And a man who inflicts an injury upon his
fellow man’
‘just as he did, so shall be done to him’
‘fracture for fracture, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth.’
The Christian equivalent in the Old testament
book of Leviticus reiterates this.
This is an explicit instruction to reciprocate injury.
And yet in Matthew 5:43, Jesus explicitly
contradicts this law
saying ‘You’ve heard that it was said’
‘ “Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.”
But I tell you….’
‘If anyone slaps you on the right cheek’
‘turn to them the other cheek.’
This verse from the Christian New Testament
contradicts the Jewish Torah
and its own Old Testament.
In the New Testament, Jesus defends and forgives
those identified as adulterers and prostitutes
and admonishes those who judge them.
In the Tanakh and the Old Testament
adulterers and prostitutes
are condemned to death by fire.
Time after time, fundamentally incompatible
principles are promoted.
So from the outset, any attempt to package
Judaism and Christianity
as some coalition of faith
creates an unworkable hybrid,
full of moral contradictions.
But it’s worse than that.
As well as basic conflicts of value
between Jewish and Christian scripture
substantially conflicting values are found
in countless areas between the subdenominations
of each religion.
Some Christians believe that accepting the
biblical figure
of Jesus as their saviour will allow them
to enter a post-death paradise called ‘heaven’.
Other Christians believe that who will and won’t
enter heaven has been decided before birth
and that nothing a person does
during their life can change that.
Some Christians are strongly separatist
distancing themselves from
those outside their group
who they label with words like ‘worldly’.
Other Christians promote inclusivity
and interfaith dialogue.
Some Jews insist the Torah
is the word of their deity.
Other Jews see the Torah as a collection of
fallible human writings
which changes their relationship to its instructions.
There are also conflicts about rituals.
Some Jews believe women
and men should be able
to publicly recite a mourning prayer called
the kaddish.
Others believe it should be reserved for men.
These individual denominations
promote incompatible principles
so to claim they represent a unified moral
tradition is untenable.
Even if we ignore the conflicting values
of Judaism and Christianity and focus
on their common ground, we find problems.
When we look at the texts both religions
regard as sacred
they contain instructions to put a long list
of people to death.
Of course, even the denominations that insist
their scripture embodies eternal,
unchanging moral values
don’t carry out these instructions
which shows a clear disconnect
between the moral values in the text
and what Jews and Christians actually do.
Of course, when a holy book tells us to kill
blasphemers, unruly children, non-believers
adulterers and same-sex lovers
better to be a hypocrite and not carry out
these barbaric instructions
than commit these killings
just to be morally consistent
with an immoral book.
But, isn’t it best,
when your own moral sense
tells you an instruction is wrong
to reject the authority of the instruction?
When a supposedly holy book tells you
to carry out executions you know to be immoral
isn’t the clearest solution to recognise
that the book isn’t holy at all?
And that its values have
no place in any civilised morality?
There’s a fundamental split
between scriptural values
and modern moral values regarding
the importance of deeds.
With few notable exceptions
— for example, where illness or coercion
is involved —
we judge people as accountable for their actions
and expect them to accept personal responsibility.
Christianity, in contrast,
discards this core value
substituting the acceptance of Jesus
as the sole consideration.
On the surface, the Bible contains
lots of instructions
about how to behave, but ultimately
deeds don’t count in Christianity.
A lifetime of bad deeds is obliterated
by accepting Jesus.
A lifetime of good deeds is obliterated
by failure to accept him.
Another fundamental split is seen in the contrast
between commandment-based
religious moral instruction
which provides no rational
other than divine authority
and commonly forbids challenge and criticism
and secular morality, constructed through
a process of independent reasoning
involving ongoing critical discussion
and education.
These differences aren’t trivial.
They have profound consequences
for our whole relationship with morality.
If we’re asked why a specific behaviour
is morally wrong
and all we can say is
‘Because a god says so’
or ‘Because my holy book says so’
or ‘Because that’s what I’ve been
brought up to believe’
we haven’t provided a moral answer at all.
We’ve just accepted what we’ve been told
to think by others.
If we’re doing as we’re told
with no intervening reflection,
copying the crowd
or simply acting out of fear of punishment
or hope of reward
we’re not exercising
our individual moral agency.
Alan claims behaviour X is morally wrong
but argues from religious authority
or tradition to justify his position.
Ben claims behaviour X is morally wrong
but justifies his position with valid reasoning.
They might share the same view about the behaviour
but Ben’s moral outlook owes no debt
of recognition to Alan’s religion.
The fact that religions promote
values doesn’t mean
those values are supported by valid reasoning.
In fact it’s through the careful application
of valid reasoning that we continue to expose
many historically celebrated
religious values as immoral.
Among a wealth of reprehensible stories
in the Jewish and Christian scriptures
are its depictions of atrocities towards children.
In the Old Testament’s book of Numbers
and its equivalent in the Tanakh, Bamidbar
we find the prophet Moses giving instructions
to kill every male child of the Midianites
and preserve any virgin female children
as sexual stock.
This from the prophet famed for delivering
the Decalogue
—ten purportedly divine commandments
governing conduct, thought and worship.
Lyrics to the Melodians’ song
‘Rivers of Babylon’
— later popularised by Boney M —
were lifted from Psalm 137 of the Bible.
The song focuses on the parts of the Psalm
that express feelings of victimhood
recounting how the Jews
were carried away in captivity
by the Babylonians and told to sing songs.
‘Rivers of Babylon’ might not
have been such a hit
if it had included verse 9 of the Psalm
which delights in a peculiar form of revenge
against the Babylonians. It states:
‘Happy is the one who seizes your infants’
‘and dashes them against the rocks.’
Some apologists have claimed
that the word ’infants’
doesn’t refer to literal infants.
It’s just being used like
the phrase ‘children of Israel’
to refer to the people of Babylon.
But Isaiah 13:16 echoes the passage in Psalms
and clearly refers literally to children.
Writing in the 1700s, in his Exposition of
the Entire Bible
Baptist John Gill commented that:
‘though it may seem a piece of cruelty’
it was ‘but a just retaliation.’
He claimed it was not ‘desired from
a spirit of revenge’
‘but for the glory of divine justice’.
The glorification of infanticide is not a
value that shapes our morals today.
Jewish and Christian bibles contain
a vast range of messages
from stories of great compassion and tenderness
to salivating accounts
of the most debased brutality.
We have the fluff and we have the snuff.
But even some of the fluffy stuff
isn’t quite so fluffy on closer inspection.
As a former Christian, I was taught
to see Jesus as the embodiment of love.
But the fact is Jesus was no respecter
of loving relationships
that didn’t include him
jealously declaring: ‘Anyone who loves
their father or mother’
‘more than me is not worthy of me;’
‘anyone who loves their son or daughter’
’more than me is not worthy of me.’
This ‘love on demand’ approach also featured
in Jesus’s command to ‘love our enemies’
as well as countless commands to love Yahweh
employing inducements and threats
to achieve compliance.
The notion of ordering people to love
denies the autonomous nature of love.
Who today would accept being told
who they should love?
Talking of relationships, the term codependency
refers to relationships in which one partner
depends on the other as an external source
of self-worth, approval and identity
instead of being able to nurture those qualities
within themselves.
Codependency is recognised
as a highly dysfunctional relationship model.
But it’s the ultimate relationship model
in Jewish and Christian scripture
where it becomes theodependency.
Here, again, instead of being inwardly cultivated
self-worth, approval and identity are sought
from an external source
—this time, a god —
leaving many followers vulnerable
to all kinds of abuse and manipulation.
The doctrine of eternal punishment
promoted by Christianity is deeply immoral
representing the most extreme possible disproportion
between transgression and penalty.
By ruling out redemption or rehabilitation,
it constitutes nothing more than everlasting
gratuitous sadism.
The foundational Christian doctrine
of vicarious redemption
proposes that the sacrifice of a supposedly
innocent individual
can atone for the sins of others.
Secular thinkers have denounced this concept
as a striking perversion of moral responsibility.
Born in the 1700s, Thomas Paine,
one of the founding fathers
of the United States, commented:
‘If I owe a person money,
and cannot pay him’
‘and he threatens to put me in prison‘
’another person can take the debt upon himself,
and pay it for me.’
‘But if I have committed a crime’
‘every circumstance of the case is changed.’
‘Moral justice cannot take the innocent
for the guilty’
‘even if the innocent would offer itself.’
‘To suppose justice to do this’
‘is to destroy the principle of its existence’
‘which is the thing itself.’
‘It is then no longer justice.’
‘It is indiscriminate revenge.’
In his book, God Created Humanism:
The Christian Basis of Secular Values
Theo Hobson seeks to give Christianity credit
for modern moral thinking. He argues:
‘Secular humanism very gradually emerged
within Christian culture.’
‘Which means that the modern humanist principles’
‘of liberty and equality are rooted in Christianity.’
If self-worth very gradually emerges
from within an abusive family
is that self-worth rooted in abuse?
If science very gradually emerges
within a culture
that rejects science for superstition
is science rooted in superstition?
Sometimes values emerge
as an attempt to shake humans
free of the surrounding culture’s
retrograde influence.
And they emerge despite the best efforts
of the surrounding culture
to stifle and suppress them.
Hobson states,
‘…. in the mid twentieth century’
‘the ideal of universal human rights
was launched‘
’by mostly Christian thinkers and statesmen.’
A chain of coffee-shops could be launched
by mostly Christian thinkers.
Doesn’t mean the coffee has Christian roots.
Christians do all kinds of things
—good, bad and indifferent —
that have nothing to do with their religion.
It’s not enough to say that something was
done by Christians.
In order to give Christianity the credit
you have to demonstrate a sound ideological
pathway to Christianity itself.
And when we look for that pathway
we find the problem mentioned before:
the pathway repeatedly splits
into conflicting directions.
This helps to explain why, historically
we’ve often seen Christians
on both sides of a dispute.
In the mid-nineteenth century
on the issue of slavery in the United States
there were Christian abolitionists
and Christian advocates
A religion proclaimed as the source
of universal human rights
should unambiguously condemn
the owning of people as property.
But it doesn’t.
Instead, Christian —and Jewish — scripture
explicitly endorses it and even proposes
a set of laws to regulate it.
A religion that stands for everything
stands for nothing.
Hobson writes: ‘Christianity gave rise to
a moral universalism’
‘that is in a sense more advanced than it’
‘for secular moral universalism is capable
of being more universalist’
‘in that it overlooks religious difference
in asserting fundamental human unity.’
Hobson tries to give the credit for
the emergence of secular morality to Christianity
while admitting that secular morality
in overlooking religious differences
demonstrates a more advanced moral perspective
than Christianity
whose doctrines repeatedly exclude and condemn
those who sincerely see no valid reason
or evidence for supernatural belief.
Credit for secular moral advances goes to
secular thinkers
not to Christianity.
The word ‘secular’ is often mistakenly
defined as atheistic.
But secular thinkers can be religious or non-religious.
Secular thinking just means the person isn’t
bringing religious faith into the matter.
Which is why, in those cases
credit goes to the thinker
and not to any faith.
He goes on to say, ‘Christianity should
affirm secular humanism’
‘as a public ideology but also say that
it is inadequate’
‘it is limited to the practical public sphere,
the surface of life’
‘it has no strong account
of life’s meaning and purpose’
‘but gravitates to an evasive shrug.’
Secular humanism doesn’t have to account
for life’s ‘meaning’ or ‘purpose’.
Many secular thinkers
don’t agree that life has
any intrinsic meaning or purpose
so not providing an account
of these doesn’t represent
a deficiency or an evasion, but a disagreement.
If Hobson wishes to make the claim
that life has meaning or purpose
it’s his burden to provide
valid support for his claim.
If he can’t shoulder that burden
then it’s his position
that amounts to an evasive shrug.
Hobson states, ‘Humanitarian ideals
are not natural’
‘nor are they rationally deducible’
‘they are complex cultural traditions,
brewed over centuries.’
‘And the main ingredient in this brewing
was the story of God’
‘taking the side, even taking the form,
of the powerless victim….’
Humanitarianism is about the promotion
of human welfare
and humanitarian ideals can be a mix
of tutored and natural.
As previously noted, we can see
the basic elements
of empathy and equity
in the prosocial behaviour of animals
and we have no reason to believe
that humans alone
require these same elements to be inserted
magically into them by supernatural means.
Of course ideals do sometimes
require some teaching
often to overcome cultural traditions
brewed over centuries—
traditions that’ve condemned,
subjugated and executed
unfathomable numbers of people
based on ignorance, superstition
and the bogus moral pronouncements
of religious scripture
like the Jewish and Christian bibles,
which set death penalties
for a huge range of harmless activities
including picking up sticks
on the wrong day of the week.
Part of the reason many harmless activities
were able to be condemned was
because of the dubious religious term ‘sin’
which has no accurate secular equivalent.
With sin, we see the invention
of a nebulous category
that can encompass any behaviour or thought
on the grounds that it represents
a transgression against some god or gods
without having to offer any evidence of harm.
It’s when we apply rational deduction
— rather than dogmatic
moral pronouncements —
that we’re able to bypass
all this superstitious savagery
and see these harmless activities
for what they are.
As a former Christian, for years,
I mistook Jesus for a victim.
I became lost in the drama and emotion
of the crucifixion story
and overwhelmed by the painful sense of guilt
that was handed to me by my indoctrinators
who told me Jesus was crucified for me.
When I later tunnelled my way out of my indoctrination
I realised the character of Jesus
wasn’t a victim at all.
If Jesus was Yahweh in human form
then Yahweh freely chose to undergo crucifixion
according to his own premeditated plan.
He had the power to do whatever he wanted.
There was no coercion or necessity.
In contrast, genuine victims
don’t have choice
or power over their situations.
Being an entirely voluntary exercise
the crucifixion story amounts to nothing more
than a divine flirtation with sadomasochism.
To characterise Jesus as a victim
is a gross insult to genuine victims.
The claim that people who live their lives
without any belief in gods,
religion or the supernatural
have had their morals shaped
by ‘Judeo-Christian’ traditions or values
can be dismantled on many grounds.
The very notion of Judeo-Christian
traditions and values
is beset with problems.
Not only do many Jews and Christians
strongly reject the awkward merging
of their ideologies
their values and the values
of the individual denominations
of their religions show significant conflict
and incompatibility.
Individual cases of resemblance
to secular values
don’t imply that secular values have borrowed
from religion ones.
Secular values can be derived independently
without reference to any religious scripture.
Animal studies demonstrating basic empathy
fairness, compassion and reconciliation
also negate the idea that religions
are the source of our values
as does the existence
of similar equitable principles
in independent human cultures around the globe.
Secular moral values can develop
through critical discussion
allowing course correction
when mistakes are discovered.
Moral judgement relies on an accurate assessment
of relevant information.
So the very principle of adapting in the light
of new information
rather than sticking dogmatically
to misguided ideas
is an important value in itself.
In contrast, religious values presented as
eternal, unchanging, perfect….
can admit no mistakes
forcing adherents to invent contorted apologetics
to try and excuse the inexcusable.
Historically, Judaism and Christianity
have both promoted
and implemented scriptural values most of
us find abhorrent today.
Secular thinking has provided moral insights
and exposed the harm in the values
of those religions
prompting followers to reevaluate
their moral stances on a range of issues
and opening the way for all of us
to advance beyond exclusive
religious moral systems
and continue to develop inclusive human values
that are relevant and coherent.
Secular thinkers have not borrowed moral capital
from the incoherent hybrid that is Judeo-Christianity.
We don’t owe Judeo-Christianity a moral debt
and we shouldn’t put up with any attempts
on its behalf at appropriating morality.